{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf200
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww22880\viewh15780\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Mike\
\
\
1) \
\
The stuff needs clustering. If you have no clustering you don\'92t need HLM. So most of what I am talking about is the average relationship in the population.\
\
With one person it would just be one person, \
The fixed effects frame would be the average growth in the population. Is there variability around that? Now you are changing it to a random effect. \
\
Standard regression to rcm; the many creates the necessary clustering. So intercept, then variability in intercept. \
\
Very few people make inferences about a person. It is about average relationship or variability. \
\
Average intercept. Variability in intercept. Can you predict it?\
\
Average trend. Variability in trend. \
\
\
Average. Variability. Is the variability predicted? This is the same set of options. \
\
2) Dynamics\
\
DV. Not in the IV.\
\
\
3) Level\
\
Just make it the unconditional means model. This is the only one with the issue.\
\
DV at one time point or just the average time point devoid of everything else. \
\
Leave as is:\
\
In models section. Take means/descriptive statistics. If you want to predict the level then you need to go into trend. \
\
Add in level correlations in other sections. \
\
4) Trend\
\
Does trend in X relate to trend in Y?\
\
\
5) Longitudinal can have differen time scales\
\
Not just yearly\
esm\
Lab studies with many things\
\
Lab study with many measurement points is longitudinal.\
\
\
\
17th before noon.\
\
\
\
\
To discuss:\
\
1) Clustering - btw, lost with fixed vs random because in my mind that has to do with UH correlating with predictors or not\
\
Current paper. Single unit over time. Multiple units over time. It is conceptual.\
\
Mike\'92s point: in our models we usually have many people, so we look at the average, then variability, then predictors of that variability.\
\
Me compared to Mike:\
\
Single person (level/trend\'85you can\'92t estimate trend for one person); variability; predictor/correlates of it. I did this to emphasis trend itself or level itself\
Average level or trend; variability in it; predictor or correlates of it.\
\
Look at trend. For a single individual you cannot estimate a trend model. So our \'93models\'94 section would be descriptive statistics. Do we write our models section to incorporate many units, or do we change the conceptual pieces to talk about the fact that we are always estimating the average.\
\
\
It basically comes down to this: mike is concerned about having a model to estimate for every idea in the paper, and my concern is getting people to understand the ideas. Take the trend section. As written there are no models for the first inference, it is just descriptive. What Mike had in mind was to say, on average trend goes up or trend goes down. So for every section we have: the average thing is this (the average trend, or the average level). Then, the variability about that thing is this. Then, there are correlates of that variability.\
\
My concern is that couches everyone\'92s thinking in the models that we have. We don\'92t get to talk about relationships, we don\'92t even necessarily get to talk about VAR modeling, and it isn\'92t so much about the ideas but the models and what you can say with the models. \
\
So that\'92s what we struggled with. On the one hand our field uses large N and short T; here are the limited inferences that you can do with that. On the other hand there are ideas that we may want our readers to be thinking about that we cannot really capture. \
\
So do we switch the focus to only multiple unit analyses? Or do we do some hard writing in the models section to say, some of the stuff is just straight descriptive statistics, but to get the average estimate across a sample use this model. \
\
\
2) Dynamics\
\
Just lags \'97 is that dynamics?\
Just memory in IV \'97 is that dynamics?\
\
3) Level\
\
We don\'92t really have a model for that except the unconditional means model. So should we write about it and then in the models section write \'93look at descipritve statistics,\'94 if you want to predict it go to the other sections.\
\
Or should level always be in relation to another section. First time point of a trend vs last time point of a trend? \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
Post talk\
\
Dynamics: constraints, something is constrained. A distributed lag model (x_t relating to y_t + 1) is not dynamics. However, some people say that dynamics is anything that you can represent in a difference equation. In that case you could simply represent trend over time with a difference equation: it is a constant forcing term. You could create a dynamic representation of trend with a recursive equation. \
\
Big point about averages in pop: change it.\
Every section should be: average thing, variability about the thing, correlate stuff with the thing.\
\
Put levels within the trend section. \
\
Discussion nuggets: foreshadow within person single unit lots of t stuff. Also include modeling levels vs. differences. In our literature we model levels (and when we want to get at change we partial a DV). In other literatures they change the meaning of the DVs by differencing first, then modeling. \
\
Interesting idea: if you cannot model a single person with it, then it is not a within person analysis.\
\
\
}