{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf200
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ---\
output: pdf_document\
---\
\
# Trend\
\
Does affect go up or down across time, or is it relatively stable? Does trainee skill increase over the training session? These are questions about trend, and these first two are specifically about linear trend. It is also possible to explore how variables bend or curve across time. Do newcomer perceptions of climate increase and then plateau over time? Does the response time of a medical team decrease with each successive case but then remain stable once the team can no longer improve their coordination? These latter questions concern curvilinear trajectories. \
\
Trend has to do with the global shape of the trajectory across time. If we put a variable on the $y$-axis and plot its values against time on the $x$-axis, do the values tend to go up or down over time? It can be thought of as the coarse-grained direction of a trajectory. A positive trend indicates that, on average across our sample, we expect the variable to increase over time and a negative trend indicates that we expect the variable to decrease over time. Our first trend inference, therefore, concerns the shape of the trajectory. What is the average trend pattern across our sample?\
\
>> **Inference 1:** On average, there is positive/negative/curvilinear trend. \
\
Researchers that explore trend often assess where it is predicted to begin or end. The word used to describe the predicted value of a trend at time $t$ (usually the first or last time point) is called level. What is the predicted level of the trainee skill trend at the beginning of a training session, on average? On average, what is the expected level of the unit climate trend at the end of a two-week socialization process?\
\
>> **Inference 2:** On average, what is the expected level of the $y$ trend at time $t$?\
\
After examining average trend and its level researchers then ask about trend variability across the sample. First consider variability in trend. Do all trainees show positive skill trends? Is there variability in the trend of helping behaviors, or counterproductive work behaviors over time? \
\
>> **Inference 3:** Trend differs/does not differ across units.\
\
Second, consider variability in level. Is there variability in affect starting level? Is there between unit variance in the CWB trend at the last time point?\
\
>> **Inference 4:** On average, there is variability in the expected level of the $y$ trend at time $t$.\
\
Finally, it is also possible to examine a between person correlation of level and trend. On average, do people with low initial skill show positive skill trends whereas people with high initial skill show negative skill trends? Do organizations with high initial CWBs, on average, tend to have negative CWB trends?\
\
>> **Inference 5:** There is a between-unit correlation between trend and level in $y$. \
\
### Multiple Variables \
\
The inferences above concern a single variable, but they can also be iterated across all observed variables. For example, we might discover that -- on average across the sample -- affect and performance trends both decrease, but there is greater variability across units in the affect trend. Or we might learn that affect has a negative trend while performance has a positive trend.\
\
Correlating these trends is the next inference. Correlating indicates co-occuring patterns, where a large positive correlation between affect and performance trends would indicate that people with a positive affect trend (usually) have a positive performance trend and people with a negative affect trend (usually) have a negative performance trend. \
\
Figure \\ref\{trend_correlation\} shows the inuition behind this inference with a set of graphs. In Panel A we plot affect and performance across time for three individuals. Affect goes up while performance goes down for person one, this pattern is reversed for person two, and person three reports trendless affect and performance (i.e., zero trend), but both variables fluctuate across time for this individual. We use different colors to label the trends for each person. The affect and performance trends for person one are labeled with red lines, whereas person two has green lines and person three has blue lines.\
\
Panel B then maps those pairings onto a figure that shows the relationship between the affect and performance trend. For example, person one has a positive affect trend and a negative performance trend, so their value in Panel B goes on the bottom right, whereas person two has the opposite pattern and therefore is placed on the top left (where the performance trend is positive and the affect trend is negative). Producing this bottom scatter plot tells us that the relationship between the affect and performance trend is negative. That is, people with a positive affect trend usually have a negative performance trend, people with a negative affect trend are more likely to have a positive performance trend, and people with no affect trend usually have no performance trend. \
\
\\begin\{center\}\
\
------------\
\
Insert Figure \\ref\{trend_correlation\} about here\
\
------------\
\
\\end\{center\}\
\
>> **Inference 3:** There is a between-person correlation among two trends. \
\
The final trend inference is about identifying covariates or predictors of trend. Does gender predict depletion trends? Does the trend in unit climate covary with between unit differences in leader quality? Notice the difference between this inference and inference three. Inference three asks how one trend is related to another between units, whereas this inference asks how one trend relates to a covariate.\
\
Figure \\ref\{trend_covariate\} demonstrates the inference in a plot. We plot affect across time for six employees, and these employees differ by job type. The first three individuals work in research and development, whereas the final three individuals work in sales. Affect trajectories tend to decrease over time for employees in research and development, whereas affect trajectories tend to increase for those in sales. An individual's job type, then, gives us a clue to their likely affect trend -- said formally, job type covaries with affect trend, such that we expect individuals in sales to have positive affect trends and individuals in research and development to have negative affect trends. The expected trends are plotted as the thick blue lines. \
\
\
\\begin\{center\}\
\
------------\
\
Insert Figure \\ref\{trend_covariate\} about here\
\
------------\
\
\\end\{center\}\
\
\
>> **Inference 4:** There are between-person correlates of trend. \
\
Before moving on note the difference between trend inferences three and four. Both are between unit, but inference three is about correlating trend with trend, whereas inference four is about the relationship between trend and a covariate/predictor. With respect to our example, inference three says, on average, if an individual has a positive affect trend then we expect them to have a negative performance trend. Inference four says, on average, if an individual is in research and development then we expect them to have a negative affect trend. \
\
Researchers that explore trend often assess where it is predicted to begin or end. The word used to describe the predicted value of a trend at time $t$ (usually the first or last time point) is called level. What is the predicted level of trainee skill at the beginning of a training session, on average? On average, what is the expected level of unit climate at the end of a two-week socialization process?\
\
>> **Inference 5:** On average, what is the expected level of the $x$ trend at time $t$?\
\
\
\
\
Inferences one and two concern a single variable, but they can of course be iterated across any or all observed variables in the study (remember that variables are different than units). For example, we might discover that affect and performance have high average levels across time, but that affect has greater level variability across units. Or we might learn that affect has a low initial level whereas performance is initially high. What we are doing here is making descriptive comparisons between the level of one variable and the level of another. We can also produce a quantitative statement about the extent to which levels are related.\
\
Correlating levels provides us with that quantitative statement. A large positive correlation between the initial levels of affect and performance would mean that people with greater initial levels of affect also tend to have greater intial performance, and people with lower initial affect also tend to have lower initial performance. \
\
Figure \\ref\{level_correlate\} demonstrates a correlation of starting levels. In Panel A we plot affect and performance trajectories for three individuals across time, where the black solid line indicates affect and the dashed line indicates performance. We indicate starting levels for both variables in Panel A by placing colored circles on the graph for each individual. For example, we indicate the starting levels of affect and performance for person one with red circles and the starting levels for person two with green circles. \
\
Panel B of figure \\ref\{level_correlate\} maps those starting levels onto a new plot that leads to our inference. On the $x$-axis is initial level of affect where high values indicate a high starting level of affect, and on the $y$-axis is initial level of performance where high values indicate a high starting level of performance. The red circle for person one is on the bottom right because that individual has a high initial level of affect and a low initial level of performance. Person two (the green circle) is on the top left because that individual has a high initial level of performance and a low initial level of affect, and person three is in the middle because they have roughly the same starting levels of affect and performance. The dots slope downward in Panel B, which tells us that there is a negative relationship between initial level of affect and initial level of performance. \
\
Overall, figure \\ref\{level_correlate\} suggests that the starting levels of affect and performance are correlated. Panel A shows the actual starting levels, and Panel B shows that there is a strong negative correlation between initial affect and initial performance. This negative relationship means that we expect people with low initial affect to have high initial performance, whereas we expect people with high initial affect to have low initial performance. \
\
>> **Inference 3:** There is a between person correlation between the level of $x$ and the level of $y$ at $t$. \
\
\
\
## Trend Inference Table\
\
The inference table below provides examples of each trend inference. Inference one is about the general direction or shape of a trajectory across time. Inference two is about variability in that shape across units. Inference three takes the trend in one variable and asks whether it co-occurs with trend in another. Inference four, finally, is about the relationship between trend in one variable and the raw values of one or more correlates.\
\
\\begin\{center\}\
\
------------\
\
Insert Table \\ref\{trend_table\} about here\
\
------------\
\
\\end\{center\}\
\
A note on phrasing. The inferences we explored in this section have to do with correlating trends, where a statement like "affect and performance trends covary, such that people with a negative affect trend have a positive performance trend" is appropriate. There is a less precise phrase that is easy to fall into -- and we have seen it used in our literature. Sometimes, researchers will correlate trends and then state, "when affect decreases performance goes up." We urge researchers to avoid this second statement because it is not clear if it refers to a static relationship about trends or a dynamic statement about how trajectories move across time. That is, the phrase "when affect decreases performance goes up" could refer to correlated trends, but it could also mean something like, "when affect decreases performance immediately or subsequently goes up." This second statement is far different and it should not be used when an analysis only correlates trends or evokes predictors of trend. Again, we urge researchers to phrase their inferences as we have shown here.\
\
\
## Models\
\
Trend is called the slope in the statistical modeling literature. That is, when a researcher estimates a model to explore whether a variable goes up or down over time she is estimating the trend coefficient. Again, the mean estimate will tell you about the trend itself and the variance estimate refers to the trend variability across units. In the statistical modeling literature these models are called growth-models or growth-curves. Keep in mind, however, that researchers use the word "change" informally to mean growth as well, so when you read a theoretical discussion you may see words like "change" and "increase" despite the researcher using a "growth" model. \
\
Broad theoretical discussions of growth and change are found in @pitariu_explaining_2010 and @ployhart_longitudinal_2010, whereas @bliese_growth_2002 describe how to go about running an analysis. Growth curves are a core topic in developmental psychology, so there are many great articles and textbooks to read from their field. See @grimm_growth_2016 and @singer_applied_2003 for two great textbooks on growth curve modeling, and @mcardle_latent_1987 for an empirical discussion. For two straight-forward empirical examples in our own field see @dunford_is_2012 and @hulsheger_dawn_2016. \
\
```\{r, echo = F\}\
library(xtable)\
library(knitr)\
library(kableExtra)\
library(tidyverse)\
\
inference_text2 <- c('There is positive/negative/curvilinear trend in a variable across time.?',\
                    'There is variability in the trend of a variable across time. Trend differs across units.',\
                    'There are correlated trends. There is a relationship between two trends.',\
                    'There are correlates/predictors of trend.')\
trend_table <- data.frame(\
  Inference = c(1, 2, 3, 4),\
  Examples = c(linebreak('Burnout decreases over time.\\nPerformance increases over time.'),\
                 linebreak('Affect trends differ across people (units).\\nThere is variability in turnover trends across organizations.'),\
                 linebreak('People with a positive health status trend have a positive happiness trend.\\nPeople with a positive performance trend have a negative anxiety trend.'),\
                 linebreak('Gender correlates with depletion trends.\\nUnit climate covaries with unit performance trends.'))\
)\
\
trend_table %>%\
  kable('latex', booktabs = T, escape = F, align = 'l', caption = '\\\\label\{trend_table\}Examples of trend inferences.') %>%\
    column_spec(1, width = '5em') %>%\
    column_spec(2, width = '30em') %>%\
  row_spec(1:3, hline_after = T)\
\
\
```\
\
\
\
```\{r, echo = F, fig.cap = 'Trend across time.\\\\label\{trend\}'\}\
set.seed(3)\
\
ind <- c(1:20)\
chris <- 4 + 0.7*ind + rnorm(20,0,0.5)\
josh <- 4 - 0.7*ind  + rnorm(20, 0, 0.5)\
chris[1] <- 4\
josh[1] <- 4\
#timothy <- c(4, 5, 15, 18, 21, 20, 19, 17, -6, -10, -12, -16, -14, 0, 1,2,3,4,5,9)\
timothy <- 15*sin(ind/3)\
\
fam <- data.frame(\
  'Time' = c(ind, ind, ind),\
  'Y' = c(chris, josh, timothy),\
  'legend' = c(rep('Positive Trend', 20), rep('Negative Trend', 20), rep('Curvilinear Trend', 20))\
)\
\
hm <- data.frame(\
  'Time' = c(ind),\
  'Y' = c(timothy)\
)\
\
library(ggplot2)\
ggplot(fam, aes(x = Time, y = Y, color = legend)) + \
  geom_point(alpha = 0.6) + \
  geom_abline(intercept = 4, slope = 0.7, color = 'blue', alpha = 0.5) +\
  geom_abline(intercept = 4, slope = -0.7, color = 'red', alpha = 0.5) + \
  scale_y_continuous(labels = NULL) + \
  theme_classic() + \
  theme(legend.title = element_blank()) + \
  scale_color_manual(values = c('Positive Trend' = 'blue', \
                                'Negative Trend' = 'red',\
                                'Curvilinear Trend' = 'green'),\
                     breaks = c('Positive Trend', \
                                'Negative Trend',\
                                'Curvilinear Trend')) + \
  geom_smooth(data = hm, aes(x = Time, y = Y), se = F, color = 'green', alpha = 0.6, size = 0.5, alpha = 0.2)\
\
\
```\
\
```\{r, echo = F, fig.cap = 'Differences in trend variability across units.\\\\label\{trend_var\}'\}\
set.seed(88)\
\
per1 <- 4 + 0.6*ind + rnorm(20, 0, 0.5)\
per2 <- 4 + 0.6*ind + rnorm(20, 0, 2)\
per3 <- 4 + 0.6*ind + rnorm(20, 0, 0.5)\
\
per4 <- 4 + 0.6*ind + rnorm(20, 0, 1)\
per5 <- 4 - 0.9*ind + rnorm(20, 0, 1)\
per6 <- 4 + 0.01*ind + rnorm(20,0,1)\
\
\
yup <- data.frame(\
  'Time' = c(ind, ind, ind, ind, ind, ind),\
  'Y' = c(per1, per2, per3, per4, per5, per6),\
  'Person' = c(rep('Person 1', 20),\
               rep("Person 2", 20),\
               rep('Person 3', 20),\
               rep('Person 1', 20),\
               rep('Person 2', 20),\
               rep('Person 3', 20)),\
  'type' = c(rep('No Trend Variability', 60),\
             rep('Trend Variability', 60))\
)\
\
\
ggplot(yup, aes(x = Time, y = Y, color = Person)) + \
  geom_point(alpha = 0.6) + \
  geom_smooth(method = 'lm', se = F, aes(color = Person), size = 0.5, alpha = 0.6) + \
  facet_wrap(~type) + \
  theme_classic() + \
  theme(legend.title = element_blank()) + \
  scale_y_continuous(labels = NULL) + \
  scale_color_manual(values = c('Person 1' = 'red',\
                                'Person 2' = 'green',\
                                'Person 3' = 'blue')\
                     )\
\
\
\
```\
\
\
```\{r, echo = F, fig.cap = 'Correlating slopes, or relating the affect to performance trend.\\\\label\{trend_correlation\}', fig.height = 10\}\
\
set.seed(33)\
tre_affect <- 6 + 0.6*ind + rnorm(20,0,1)\
tre_perf <- 2 - 0.6*ind + rnorm(20,0,1)\
\
affect2 <- 6- 0.6*ind + rnorm(20,0,1)\
perf2 <- 2 + 0.6*ind + rnorm(20,0,1)\
\
affect3 <- 5 + 0.02*ind + rnorm(20,0,1)\
perf3 <- 5 + 0.01*ind + rnorm(20,0,1)\
\
trend_rel <- data.frame(\
  'Time' = c(ind, ind,\
             ind, ind,\
             ind, ind),\
  'Value' = c(tre_affect, tre_perf,\
          affect2, perf2,\
          affect3, perf3),\
  'call' = c(rep('Affect', 20),\
              rep('Performance', 20),\
             rep('Affect', 20),\
             rep('Performance', 20),\
             rep('Affect', 20),\
             rep('Performance', 20)),\
  'Person' = c(rep('Person 1', 40),\
               rep('Person 2', 40),\
               rep('Person 3', 40))\
)\
\
trend_lines <- data.frame(\
  'Person' = c('Person 1',\
          'Person 1',\
          'Person 2',\
          'Person 2',\
          'Person 3',\
          'Person 3'),\
  'call' = c('Affect',\
             'Performance',\
             'Affect', \
             'Performance',\
             'Affect',\
             'Performance'),\
  'intercept' = c(6, 2,\
                  6, 2, \
                  5, 5),\
  'slope' = c(0.6, -0.6,\
              -0.6, 0.6,\
              0.02, 0.01)\
)\
\
tp1 <- ggplot(trend_rel, aes(x = Time, y = Value, group = call)) + \
  geom_line(aes(linetype = call)) + \
  theme_classic() + \
  scale_y_continuous(labels = NULL) + \
  theme(legend.title = element_blank()) + \
  facet_grid(~Person, scales = 'free', space = 'free') + \
  geom_abline(aes(intercept = intercept, slope = slope, color = Person), data = trend_lines, alpha = 0.9, show.legend = F) + \
  scale_color_manual(values = c('Person 1' = 'red',\
                                'Person 2' = 'green',\
                                'Person 3' = 'blue')) + \
  ggtitle('Panel A')\
  \
\
\
\
trend_trend <- data.frame(\
  'Affect' = c(-0.8, 0, 0.8),\
  'Performance' = c(0.8, 0, -0.8),\
  'label' = c('green', 'blue', 'red')\
)\
\
tp2 <- ggplot(trend_trend, aes(x = Affect, y = Performance, color = label)) + \
  geom_point(size = 6, alpha = 0.6) + \
  theme_classic() + \
  scale_y_continuous(breaks = c(-1, 0, 1)) + \
  scale_x_continuous(breaks = c(-1, 0, 1)) + \
  ylab("Trend in Performance") + \
  xlab("Trend in Affect") + \
  ggtitle('Panel B') + \
  theme(legend.title = element_blank()) + \
  scale_color_manual(values = c('red' = 'red', \
                                'blue' = 'blue',\
                                'green' = 'green'),\
                     labels = c('Person 3',\
                                'Person 2',\
                                'Person 1'))\
                     #breaks = c('Person 1',\
                          #      'Person 2',\
                           #     'Person 3'))\
\
library(gridExtra)\
\
grid.arrange(tp1, tp2, ncol = 1)\
\
```\
\
```\{r, echo = F, fig.cap = 'Job type as a covariate of affect trend.\\\\label\{trend_covariate\}'\}\
\
library(ggplot2)\
library(tidyverse)\
\
xs <- c(1:20)\
\
person1 <- 4 + 0.5*xs + rnorm(20,0,1)\
person2 <- 4 + 0.6*xs + rnorm(20,0,1)\
person3 <- 4 + 0.36*xs + rnorm(20,0,1)\
\
person4 <- 4 - 0.5*xs + rnorm(20,0,1)\
person5 <- 4 - 0.45*xs + rnorm(20,0,1)\
person6 <- 4 - 0.68*xs + rnorm(20, 0, 1)\
\
\
covary_trend_df <- data.frame(\
  'id' = c(rep('Person 6',20), rep('Person 5',20), rep('Person 4',20),\
           rep('Person 3',20), rep('Person 2',20), rep('Person 1',20)),\
  'affect' = c(person1, person2, person3,\
               person4, person5, person6),\
  'time' = c(xs, xs, xs,\
             xs, xs, xs),\
  'job_type' = c(rep('Sales', 60),\
                 rep('Research and Development', 60))\
  \
)\
\
trend_df <- data.frame(\
  'id' = c('Person 6',\
           'Person 5',\
           'Person 4',\
           'Person 3',\
           'Person 2',\
           'Person 1'),\
  'intercept' = c(rep(4, 6)),\
  'slope' = c(rep(0.45, 3),\
              rep(-0.52, 3)),\
  'job_type' = c(rep('Sales', 3),\
                 rep('Research and Development', 3))\
)\
\
ggplot(covary_trend_df, aes(x = time, y = affect, linetype = id)) + \
  geom_point() + \
  geom_line() + \
  theme_classic() +\
  theme(legend.title = element_blank()) + \
  ylab('Affect') + \
  xlab('Time') + \
  scale_y_continuous(labels = NULL) + \
  facet_wrap(~job_type) + \
  geom_abline(data = trend_df, aes(intercept = intercept, slope = slope, color = id), alpha = 0.2, show.legend = F, size = 4) + \
  scale_color_manual(values = c('Person 1' = 'blue',\
                                'Person 2' = 'blue',\
                                'Person 3' = 'blue',\
                                'Person 4' = 'blue',\
                                'Person 5' = 'blue',\
                                'Person 6' = 'blue'))\
  \
\
\
\
```\
\
\
\
}